.TH PEAR 1 "1 Oct 2013" "PEAR" "PEAR manual"
.SH NAME
PEAR - Paired-end reads merger
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pear
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION
.BR PEAR
is a paired-end reads merger for the Illumina platform.
.PP
\fBPEAR\fR evaluates all possible paired-end read overlaps and does
not require the target fragment size as input. It also implements
a statistical test for minimizing false-positive results. The highly optimized
and parallelized implementation allows for merging millions of paired-end reads
within a few minutes on a standard desktop computer.
.PP
Using \fBPEAR\fR is very easy. Invoke it from the prompt of your command interpreter as follows:
.sp
.if n \{\
.RS 4
.\}
.nf
shell> \fBpear \-f\fR \fB\fIforward-fastq\fR\fR\fB \-r \fR\fB\fIreverse-fastq\fR\fR\fB \-o \fR\fB\fIouput\fR\fR
.fi
.if n \{\
.RE
.\}
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-f\fR, \fB\-\-forward\-fastq=\fIFILENAME\fR\fR
Forward paired-end FASTQ file
.TP
\fB\-r\fR, \fB\-\-reverse\-fastq=\fIFILENAME\fR\fR
Reverse paired-end FASTQ file
.TP
\fB\-o\fR, \fB\-\-output=\fIFILENAME\fR\fR
Output filename
.TP
\fB\-p\fR, \fB\-\-p\-value=\fIPVALUE\fR\fR
Specify the value \fIPVALUE\fR as the p-value for the statistical test. If the computer
p-value of a possible merging exceeds the specified p-value then the paired-end read will
not be merged. Valid options are: \fB0.0001\fR, \fB0.001\fR, \fB0.01\fR, \fB0.05\fR and
\fB1.0\fR. Setting \fB1.0\fR disables the test. (default: \fB0.01\fR)
.TP
\fB\-v\fR, \fB\-\-min\-overlap=\fIVALUE\fR\fR
Set \fIVALUE\fR as the minimum overlap size. The minimum overlap may be set to \fB1\fR when
the statistical test is used. However, further restricting the minimum overlap size to a 
proper value may reduce false-positive assemblies. (default: \fB10\fR)
.TP
\fB\-m\fR, \fB\-\-max\-assembly\-length=\fIVALUE\fR\fR
Set \fIVALUE\fR as the maximum possible length of the assembled sequences. Setting this
value to \fB0\fR disables the restriction and assembled sequences may be arbitrarily long (default: \fB0\fR)
.TP
\fB\-n\fR, \fB\-\-min\-assembly\-length=\fIVALUE\fR\fR
Set \fIVALUE\fR as the minimum possible length of the assembled sequences. Setting this
value to \fB0\fR disables the restriction and assembled sequences may be arbitrarily long (default: \fB0\fR)
.TP
\fB\-t\fR, \fB\-\-min-trim-length=\fIVALUE\fR\fR
Sets the minimum length of reads after trimming the low quality part (see option \fB\-q\fR) to \fIVALUE\fR.
(default: \fB1\fR)
.TP
\fB\-q\fR, \fB\-\-quality\-threshold=\fIVALUE\fR\fR
Sets the quality score threshold for trimming the low quality part of a read to \fIVALUE\fR. If the quality scores
of two consecutive bases are strictly less than the specified threshold, the rest of the read will
be trimmed. (default: \fB0\fR)
.TP
\fB\-u\fR, \fB\-\-max\-uncalled\-base=\fIVALUE\fR\fR
Sets the maximal proportion of uncalled bases in a read to \fIVALUE\fR. Setting this value to
\fB0\fR will cause \fBPEAR\fR to discard all reads that contain uncalled bases. The other extreme
setting is \fB1\fR which causes \fBPEAR\fR to process all reads independent on the  number of
uncalled bases. (default: \fB1\fR)
.TP
\fB\-g\fR, \fB\-\-test\-method=\fITYPE\fR\fR
Specifies the type of statistical test. Two options are available, \fB1\fR and \fB2\fR. (default: \fB1\fR)
.TP
.PP
\fB1\fR: Given the minimum allowed overlap, test using the highest OES. Note that due to its
discrete nature, this test usually yields a lower p-value for the assembled read than the cut-off (specified by \fB\-p\fR).
For example, setting the cut-off to \fB0.05\fR using this test, the assembled reads might have an actual p-value
of \fB0.02\fR
.TP
.PP
\fB2\fR: Use the acceptance probability (m.a.p). This test method computes the same probability as test method \fB1\fR. However,
it assumes that the minimal overlap is the observed overlap with the highest OES, instead of the one
specified by \fB\-v\fR. Therefore, this is not a valid statistical test and the 'p\-value' is in fact the 
maximal probability for accepting the assembly. Nevertheless, in practice, test \fB2\fR can correctly assemble 
more reads with only slightly higher false-positive rate when the actual overlap sizes are relatively small.
.TP
\fB\-e\fR, \fB\-\-empirical\-freqs\fR
Disable empirical base frequencies. (default: use empirical base frequencies)
.TP
\fB\-s\fR, \fB\-\-score\-method=\fIMETHOD\fR\fR
Specify the scoring method. Three options are available, \fB1\fR, \fB2\fR and \fB3\fR. (default: \fB2\fR)
.TP
.PP
\fB1\fR: OES with +1 for match and -1 for mismatch
.TP
.PP
\fB2\fR: Assembly score (AS). Use +1 for match and -1 for mismatch multiplied by base quality scores
.TP
.PP
\fB3\fR: Ignore quality scores and use +1 for a match and -1 for a mismatch
.TP
\fB\-b\fR, \fB\-\-phred\-base=\fIVALUE\fR\fR
Sets the base PHRED quality score to \fIVALUE\fR. (default: \fB33\fR)
.TP
\fB\-y\fR, \fB\-\-memory=\fISIZE\fR\fR
Specifies the amount of memory to be used. The number may be followed by one of the letters \fBK\fR, \fBM\fR, or \fBG\fR
denoting Kilobytes, Megabytes and Gigabytes, respectively. Bytes are assumed in case no letter is specified. (default: \fB200M\fR)
.TP
\fB\-j\fR, \fB\-\-threads=\fITHREADS\fR\fR
Use \fITHREADS\fR number of threads
.PP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
This help screen
.SH AUTHORS
\fBTomas Flouri\fR <Tomas.Flouri@h\-its.org>
.br
\fBJiajie Zhang\fR <Jiajie.Zhang@h-its.org>
.br
\fBKassian Kobert\fR <Kassian.Kobert@h-its.org>
.br
\fBAlexandros Stamatakis\fR <Alexandros.Stamatakis@h-its.org>
.SH BUGS
Report \fBPEAR\fR bugs to \fBpear-users@googlegroups.com\fR
.SH SEE ALSO
For more information, please refer to the \fBPEAR\fR, which is available online at \fBhttp://www.exelixis-lab.org/pear\fR
